at a much much deeper level what he does
is he shatters the barrier between the
sublunar and the super lunar spheres
because now showing an underlying Unity
right here's the three rules that will
govern not only the Arc of a comet
across the sky but the Descent of an
apple from a tree why did Newton have
any right to expect that he could do
that why were people working on that
problem at that time it's because of the
assumptions that you're describing that
when when we see math we think we're
looking at something universally valid
and that something that not only hangs
together in our brains but will also
send a rocket ship to Mars one
[Music]
day so I had the opportunity today to
speak with Spencer claven I met Spencer
partly through my connections with the
daily wire but also more specifically we
filmed a documentary together for the
foundations of the West series that's
now available on The Daily wire you
could take a look at it there there's a
series of dinner meetings that go along
with that as well that expand out the
ideas that we analyzed the more proximal
reason for speaking with Spencer today
was that he has a new book coming out
called light of the Mind light of the
world which is available in mid October
October 2024 uh just a couple of weeks
after this episode in particular was
taped and we walk through his book which
is an analysis of the what would you say
of the development of the ideas of the
Scientific Revolution and an examination
of their relationship to the religious
ideas that still surround them and that
constitute their metaphysical basis but
also an analysis of the dynamic
relationship between those system those
systems ideas religion versus science
let's say as those ideas progressed
through time since the dawn of the
Scientific Revolution for me during the
conversation time flew by very rapidly
and Spencer said he had the same
experience so we're hoping that that um
Spirit of timelessness that encompasses
you when you are investigating honestly
things that you believe to be true will
also surround you as you watch this
discussion so welcome to that so Spencer
the last time we had any real
opportunity to speak together was in
Athens that's right in front of the
Acropolis which now got the Arizona
mountains in the background but uh it's
a bit of a change yeah yeah well it was
a good deal to meet in Athens and that
was part for everybody watching and
listening that was part of the
foundations of the West documentary
series which has been recently released
on The Daily wire plus platform and so I
did a series of documentaries two in
jerus Jalem one with Ben Shapiro and one
with Jonathan Paso one in Rome with
Bishop Baron and one in Athens with
Spencer claven and so that was fun so
what's been the consequence for you or
for the daily wire as far as you know of
release of the foundations of the West
well it's really fascinating and first
of all you know just looking back at
that series when when I got to rewatch
it as it came out to think what a honor
and a privilege we had to be there
together I just a gift and it was a
while back that we filmed that show and
I was really struck by the fact that the
logic of our conversation at dinner took
us to this discussion of anti-Semitism
as you called it the spirit of Cain and
we sort of arrived at before the October
7th Massacre before all of the horrors
that have unfolded since we had that
talk we kind of arrived at the spirit of
the age that that's moving and so on one
level it's very sorrowful to look back
and see how true that was what we were
talking about on the other hand it's
sort of a confirmation that these ideas
these issues are so vital now you know
these things that are supposedly so
Antiquated oh it's ancient history and
we're chasing it out of the academy
because it's white and it's evil or
supremacist or whatever in fact the
ideas of the West and the princip of the
West are are so deeply under threat that
they become ever more vital by the day
so it's been wonderful to hear from
people that this has given them a kind
of grounding in where they come from
because we feel so alone in time these
days we feel so cut off from our
ancestry and we've been told that
everything basically before sometime in
the middle of the 19th century is just
backwards nonsense if if that and now
this leaves people without kind of any
Ming in these extremely turbulent times
so I think you know besides just the joy
of doing it ourselves and the the
wonderful conversation we had um it's
it's great to know that we're giving
people something and that is grounding
in in history and and a Connection to
the Past it was really good of the
editors the editors did a very good job
in linking together the conversations
within each documentary section m in a
manner that produced a coherent
conversation because it was a very
spontaneous Enterprise and then also
across all four and then part of that of
course was the dinners that we had
afterwards in remarkably beautiful
locations crazily beautiful locations I
mean and those turned out to be very
coherent as well and I think one of the
things that made the documentary
different from others of its type let's
say is that we concentrated more on the
meaning of the ideas than on the facts
of the historical progression the
significance of the historical ideas
rather than the nature of the ideas
themselves or the historical events and
so that's also I think emblematic of
this
different conceptualization of the world
that's starting to emerge in a way on
the ashes of the Enlightenment
so one of the things that I've been
writing about and thinking about and and
I believe this strikes right to the
heart of the issue
is that the postmodern types were
correct in one way not uniquely correct
but but still correct even a sto clock
they're they're well right but but but
to give the devil his due like the it's
very interesting and worthy of
consideration that a small group of
essentially literary critics have
upended the world Fuko for example
dareda nice and that that's at the
bottom that up Act of upending is at the
bottom of the culture wars something
like that doesn't happen by accident and
what the postmodernists got right in
their suspicions was
that we cannot see the world merely in
consequence of apprehending the Dead
facts yes it's not possible you know and
I've been looking into that a lot I mean
there's a bunch of reasons it's not
possible I mean the first reason is
there's way too many facts there's a
fact per phenomenon or a fact per
combination of phenomena right so
there's an infinite number of facts and
so you drown in facts alone you have to
prioritize them you have to funnel you
have to have some sort of organizing
yeah yeah yeah you you have to no just
to look you have to have some organizing
principle because and this is where the
science starts to reflect it as well the
strict empiricist types act as if what
presents itself to you are
unquestionable Sensations right that the
sensations themselves the perceptions
have the have truth as part and parcel
of their nature yes self-evident truth
it's not true and the reason it's not
true is because you cannot separate
perception physiologically from action
yes so it's it's particularly
interesting if you think about how your
eyes work because when you're looking at
something so you say well there it is
right in front of me it's like no to
actually understand how Vision Works
it's better to think about it the way
you might think about touch for a blind
person so you do when you're using your
fingers if you're blind you have to move
them and then you map out the Contours
of the thing that you're perceiving and
you aggregate
those
individual perceptions let's say micro
perceptions into a hole yes and even if
you're blind the
whole w l e manifests itself as a unity
in your imagination so the idea that
blind people don't see is wrong they
don't see light but they perceive shape
otherwise they couldn't Orient
themselves in the world you do the same
with your eyes you're
feeling you're feeling your way out with
your eyes by moving your eyes like
you're exploring and you piece the world
together that way and you cannot do that
without intent without Aim so even to
focus your eyes you know because I could
look at you and focus there or I could
look you know 30 ft away and focus there
just the choice of focus is goal
directed and value predicated so
perception itself is saturated by value
and the postmodernists figured this out
they figured out and they were right
that either there's two ways of looking
at it
either we see the world through a story
that's one way of thinking about it or a
descript
of the value structure through which we
see the world is a story it is a story
okay so they were right now robotics
engineers figured this this out and
cognitive scientists figured it out and
neuros psychologists figured it out
there multiple disciplines converged on
this where the postmodernists went wrong
and this is a serious error was they
said well we see the world through a
story there's no uniting story so that's
skepticism of meta narratives yes but
Power rules everything they slipped into
a kind of Marxism right so it's
contradictory yeah okay extremely
remarkable your thoughts on this subject
are really dovetailing with something
that I've been tangling with as well
recently you know I've got this book
that's coming out called light of the
Mind light of the world right light of
the Mind light of the world that's
coming out in this is October 5th today
October 15th uh so so it's coming out
October 15th yes so with a couple weeks
ESS and it's the subtitle is
Illuminating science through faith so
the book is effectively uh new history
of the scientific Enterprise told as if
the question of spiritual matters is not
yet resolved because we have we've sort
of begun with this idea or I at least
grew up with this idea that if you
wanted to believe in anything religious
you basically had to
throw your reason out the door
especially right so there's there's an
implicit description of the nature of
reality there which you alluded to
earlier which is that we were in the
Dark Ages until the scientific method
emerged and then we stepped into the
light and the scientific method is
antithetical to the religious and and
vice versa yes it has to do with exactly
this separation that you're talking
about between what I think we would Now
call the subjective and the objective
world and this kind of myth that there
exists these bare facts out in the world
with no interpreting mode available you
can just look at the world without any
kind of human interpretation and that's
what the rationalists objected to when
they were objecting to the presumptions
of the empiricist right they didn't like
the idea of self-evident sense data they
knew that we imposed something like an a
prior structure on the world but they
they didn't they didn't what would you
say they didn't take the step they
thought about that in interpretive
framework and maybe this is mostly the
Greek influence as something that was
rational but it doesn't seem to be
rational it seems to be narrative yes
it's during the Scientific Revolution in
fact it's Galileo who for the first time
draws this division between what will
come to be called primary and secondary
qualities and the primary qualities you
may know are things like quantity Mass
position these these quantifiable things
so primary qualities are actually
quantities and they're therefore
supposed to be completely mined
independent which if you think about it
for a second is a remarkable claim that
numbers have nothing to do with the
human mind since I joined forces with
the daily wire plus we've built a
comprehensive collection of Premium
content get the entire collection of
mastering life strengthen your
relationship with my series marriage in
the series on masculinity discover your
purpose Envision and Destiny develop a
vision for your own life you need to do
that my new series negotiation offers
practical steps to help you close a deal
where both sides walk away with a win
we're also offering a three-part series
on success how to strengthen your family
and to strengthen your relationships and
to aim up people are struggling with
depression and anxiety you walk through
all of that how do you cope with it
what's the best pathway
forward in addition we've explored
biblical writings and their cultural
influence our new 10p part series on the
gospels delineates the accounts of the
New Testament writings and finally join
me on a Journey Through Time foundations
of the West the work I'm doing with the
daily wire brings the spirit of
Adventure forward join us on dailywire
plus
today right well mathematicians
themselves differ on on that on that
interpretation because some of them
believe
that the mathematical realm is an
independent reality that human beings
discover and others think well it's a
subjective construction that bears some
correspondence to the world there's much
to be said on both sides of those
arguments no but merely presuming that
as you pointed out that numbers are
self-evident and have nothing to do with
the psych right right the way we
structure things and so there was this
hope this very exciting hope at the time
that you could draw a picture of the
world from no human standpoint that the
world effectively could be reduced to
this machine that operates entirely
independently of our participation in it
and the secondary qualities things like
color and sound and all of those tactile
Sensations that you're describing and
the way that we build our momentary
Impressions up into a picture of the
world all of that was secondary in other
words more subjective
right and gradually over time as the
scientific method demonstrated such
enormous power it began to seem as if
that picture of the world the primary
qualities picture of the world was all
that was really real because everything
else seemed so everything could be
reduced to that exct yeah well it's
funny because those so-called primary
qualities are something like what
everything has in common and so there is
there is something foundational about
them but you know how the brain handles
that to some degree is quite interesting
so if you look at the visual system so
your primary
cortex extracts out from the visual
field some things that you might regard
as primary edges for example and you
could think of those edges Edge
detection as one of the primary
constituent elements of visual
perception and then that information so
moves from the retin say to the first
level of visual processing and then it
moves up a hierarchy of visual
processing toward perception now at the
highest level perception itself involves
motor movement so for example when I
look at this
glass although I don't know it when I
look at the glass my the grip I would
use to grip that glass is activated by
the perception so part of what I
perceive as the glass is grippable
object of a certain M with these
Dimensions that I could lift in this
manner and that's activated by the
perception without me thinking about it
it's part of the perception now there's
one other thing that's relevant okay so
you could imagine that when people first
started to talk about the visual system
they thought well they're basic
perceptions and they feed upward to the
realm of emotion motivation thought
action one way upward but the way the
system is actually constructed is that
all the different levels of the visual
system feed back to one another so even
at the level of primary perception yes
most of what you see when you see
something familiar isn't the object it's
your memory of the object right so you
start to substitute that's part of what
gives you that feeling of Fami
familiarity I've seen this before yes
it's also weirdly enough one of the
things that obscures the wonder of the
world because as your perception Auto
Ates as a consequence of repeated
familiarity with something instead of
seeing the thing in itself whatever that
is you start to see the memory of your
perception of the thing now that's super
efficient here here's a good way of
thinking about it you know once you're
literate you can't look at a word
without hearing it in your imagination
okay you hear it because your eyes the
part of the brain that's devoted to
visual perception and the part that's
devoted to auditory perception in the
cortex overlap so your eyes are actually
working as ears wow yeah it's so cool a
sythetic that's right but but you once
you're once you've established that
circuitry you can't look at a word
without seeing the without hearing the
word right it's part of the perception
well you know is the word on a page
there as an objective entity well yes
the answer is yes and no so anyways the
the problem with the primary and
secondary model neurophysiologically
speaking is that because there's
feedback loops from every level to every
other level it isn't the idea of a
oneway of a step process towards higher
level of perceptions just isn't right
there's so much top down constraint even
on the primary perceptions that it's
almost impossible to disentangle the
subjective from the objective in
perception and Francis Bon worried about
this actually when he because his whole
effort was to get back to what the
Greeks would have called Imperia right
direct experience and this was going to
be the Touchstone of truth and you were
supposed to clear away every
preconceived theory that you had before
you arrived at the Hard data then you
could apply your theories but there's a
passage where bacon says the mind is
like a pair of glasses or rather like a
notepad upon which you're writing you
you can't clear something old away until
you've written in something new in other
words there always that lens yeah that's
a that's a major
it also it also implies that you almost
never learn anything without subjecting
something previous to a death right
which this is partly what makes a
revelatory conversation or realization
painful is that yeah and so here's
another neurophysiological and
sociological problem with the idea of
primary
perception you you're constituted so
that in in your
embodiment the fact of skepticism about
skepticism about direct sense data is
built in here's why well you could see
something and assume it was real yes
well then why don't we just have one
sense and you might say
well because things happen behind you
let's say which you can't see well then
why don't you have eyes all the way
around your head okay and why more
profoundly is like why Vision Plus
hearing plus touch plus taste plus smell
and then proprioception as well and the
answer is because the data coming in
from any given single sensory source is
not determinative it's
sufficiently flawed so that if you
relied on only that you
die and so but but it's worse than that
it's worse than that because we have
five Dimensions that we use to
triangulate so to speak on reality but
that's even that's not reliable enough
even five qualitatively distinct sources
of input the senses which are very
different from one another right if they
all report the same thing we think it's
there but no we don't we think maybe
it's there and then we ask other people
right have toate and then not only do we
ask other people yeah but we refer to
tradition and then not only do we ask
other people and refer to tradition we
also this this is something the the the
Scientific Revolution really did produce
and Francis Bacon in particular of
course bacon and dayart together
determined that there were ways that we
could approach the problem of what was
real that would be more rigorous and so
the scientific method came up and the
idea there would be if we're trying to
account for something and there's a
multiplicity of potential P causal
Pathways will reduce the causal pathway
that's re that's under question to one
and then systematically vary it it's
brilliant thing to do it's brilliant and
what's so to me tragic about the story
in the true sense in that there's really
no villain in this story it's just
there's there's a shadow that follows in
the light of this discovery I think
maybe there's the villains of the French
Revolution well the French always we can
always Le the French and in fact Pier
Simon llas who was Newton's greatest
interpreter in in France who took
Newtonian mechanics and applied it
marvelously to astrophysics
is if there is a villain of my book for
instance it's pieron laas and that he's
the guy who takes this method and these
mathematical laws for organizing our
observations that is Newtonian mechanics
and he draws out of that this claim that
the world itself is exhaustively
described in what we would Now call a
purely objective terms that is all a
bunch of particulate matter moving in
these totally mind independent ways and
he writes this essay demon he's of
lasses demon on probabilities that if
you had a mind knew right that knew the
position and momentum of every particle
in the world past present and future
would lay open like a book so he's
describing the mind of God but
attributing mankind attributing to
mankind the possibility of finding this
sort of knowledge a zero standpoint
that's such an it's such an interesting
claim there too because it shows that
even in a claim that simple yes there's
an if which is a proclamation an a prior
proclamation of a certain kind of faith
precis if precisely this exists and the
problem with lassis demon which is
supposed to let's say be able to track
the position and momentum of every
microparticle is it can't it can right
so so the whole if is wrong right so the
fundamental axium of faith upon which
the deterministic model of objective
reality is predicated is false and
[Music]
bz you start to talk about the second
law of Thermodynamics and why it is that
things tend toward entropy and suddenly
you've Hit Upon a rule of the material
world that is nevertheless not strictly
speaking a law in the sense of being
something that must happen by necessity
and it's that Discovery actually that's
a precursor to the quantum Revolution
it's not exactly the same but the same
mode of thought is operative in boltzman
and Max plank who's after whom we name
the constant that describes the quantum
and that explosion of the atomistic
deterministic idea of the world that
reduces everything outside of us and
ultimately us as well to Mere Bodies in
Motion that can somehow be known from a
zero standpoint of God's eye view that
totally upends this way of of thinking
about the world and starts I think to
point us back toward what your
describing and I think that what you're
describing is at a very deep and
primordial level also what the Book of
Genesis well well let's let's delve into
that for a bit going online without
expressvpn is like putting all your
passwords and credit card numbers on a
huge billboard for the whole world to
see in our increasingly connected World
your personal data is more vulnerable
than ever every time you connect to an
unsecured Network at a cafe hotel or
airport your essentially broadcasting
your private information to anyone who
cares to look and here's the unsettling
truth it doesn't take a tech genius to
hack your data with some basic
inexpensive equipment even a techsavvy
teenager could potentially access your
passwords Bank logins and credit card
details your personal information is a
gold mine hackers can make up to $1,000
per person selling this data on the dark
web this is where expressvpn comes in it
creates a secure encrypted tunnel
between your device and the internet
effectively show Ting out potential
Intruders but why choose expressvpn over
other options first its security is
unparalleled expressvpn's encryption is
so robust that it would take a hacker
with a supercomputer over a billion
years to crack that's not just
protection that's Peace of Mind second
it's incredibly user friendly you don't
need to be a tech expert to safeguard
your data just open the app click one
button and you're protected it's that
simple I personally use expressvpn
whenever I'm traveling or working from a
public space as someone who values
intellectual property and privacy
knowing that my research writings and
personal Communications are secure is
invaluable it allows me to focus on my
work without worrying about digital
vulnerabilities secure your online data
today by visiting expressvpn.com Jordan
that's
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free expressvpn.com
Jordan I mean the problem with this sort
of discussion is that when any pseudo
intellectuals get together to put
forward a pseudo intellectual Enterprise
they always pull in some strange element
of quantum mechanics rip off that often
very badly understood and I'm very aware
that we could wander into the same
territory but there is the the the
fundamental proclamation of the Book of
Genesis which is echoed in many
mythological Traditions mhm like there's
a shared pattern for example in the
Mesopotamian creation
yeah and it's very widespread idea that
what gives rise to reality eternally so
at the beginning of time now and forever
in the future is something like an
active force of apprehension or
conception that interacts not with a
deterministic world but with a realm of
possibility a realm of structured
possibility and casts that into being
it's now to me that's very reminiscent
of what Consciousness itself does like
Consciousness you're not conscious of
what's predictable so this is so cool
right because if you think about that
lassan world it's deterministic one
thing follows another it's rule like it
can be turned into an algorithm yes okay
anything that you do that can be turned
into an algorithm yeah vanishes from
Consciousness right so really what your
Consciousness does as it operates this
neurological reality is it it it's an
exploratory process that involves
generally the activation of large areas
of the brain yes if you're learning a
new word for example when you learn the
new word a fairly that a fairly
widespread pattern of neurological
activation will accompany your initial
perceptions right if it's a really new
word it's even hard to hear the first
couple of times you might have to re
have it repeated to you multiple times
and then you might have to say it
multiple times right okay so what you're
doing well you hear it repeatedly and
you say it repeatedly is you reduce the
number of neurological operations that
are necessary in order to specify that
phenomena and you build this little
machine yeah left side of your brain
farther back in the brain this little
machine that's specialized for that now
and then from then on in when you
encounter that phenomena you use that
little specialized machine yeah so but
the but what Consciousness itself is
doing
is concentrating on what isn't
deterministic yet what isn't predictable
what hasn't been established right and
then if it can it algorithmization
everything that you can predict this is
so important yes yes everything you can
predict vanishes from your sight right
profound right so Consciousness actually
does seem to be the thing that lives on
the edge of the transforming Horizon of
the future and that so the reality this
is what seems to be portrayed in the
Book of Genesis with the idea of toou
vaboh or t is that what your
Consciousness apprehends is not the
deterministic world that can be turned
into an algorithm but
those elements of the world that are not
yet revealed but could be that's what
you're contending with and I I want to
return to something you said about sort
of pseudo intellectuals bandying about
these scientific ideas because I think
that's absolutely right there's a very
dangerous direction of travel here where
you end up saying something like science
has proved the Book of Genesis or like
that and that's actually not what either
of us is saying at all but rather quite
the reverse that the Book of Genesis is
describing here a pattern and indeed an
Al allegorical template that ramifies
out into every possible sphere of life
so this notion that you have that the
world is invested in some sense from the
beginning with language V Elohim and God
said or or right let there be light and
there was light and in the Hebrew let
there be light and and there was light
are almost the exact same word it's
impossible POs to capture this in the
structures of of English but in in
Hebrew because time is is factored so
differently into the verbal system When
God says let there be light he says y or
and then when the text says and there
was light it says V or it's the same
thing so to me what and light existed
and light God said be light and light be
or something that you know if you could
say it that way what this implies I
think is that the text is describing a
situation in which mind invests matter
with these implicit structures that you
are Illuminating from a a cognitive and
psychological perspective and that when
man is invited into the garden to name
the animals he's not simply inventing
the Hebrew language or coming up with
the particular sounds he's going to say
it's much much deeper than that his mind
is formed in such a way as to draw out
these implicit yeah definitely
definitely well that's partly why
there's an that there's an echo in
Genesis where the word is what brings
being into reality and then human beings
are said to be made in that image and
then that's reflected further in the
text by God's granting to Adam the power
to name and God himself in the text
brings the animals to Adam to see what
he'll name them right not only that but
you know what he does he brings them to
him each after its form and kind so he's
not bringing a cat he's bringing cat as
a category which is a very different
sort of thing you know the text is quite
explicit that what's being presented to
Adam is not any particulate entity so
much as entities as members of of the
classes that we use to categorize our
perceptions and to draw them into that
form I mean you were talking earlier
about touching the edge of the cup as a
as a blind person you think also my one
of my favorite examples is hearing which
just at a basic kind of you know High
School physics kind of level we know
that hearing is is a wave right that is
to say it's a pattern of change over
time and so even before you get to the
quality of what you hear that is this is
a song or This is speech or what have
you if you take a snapshot of every
particle in your body if you could in
that lassan way at a moment in this
conversation where we are discussing in
the sound waves are vibrating between us
nowhere in that snapshot is anything
resembling a soundwave because the
Soundwave involves the pattern of change
over time and so in order to create even
sound you need this box into which you
can gather and group individual moments
of of perception that form them together
so everything that's that top down
processing that that that brings things
together in Unity this is another one of
the weaknesses of the postmodern claim
that there's no Transcendent Unity no
meta narrative which is another which is
a restatement of the idea of the
collapse of the highest the collapse of
the unifying principle the collapse of
God the death of God see one of the real
problems with that hypothesis is
that it's
boundless so there's
no there's no inevitable order Unity
okay at what level of analysis are you
speaking because if I'm going to
perceive this as a glass right then all
of the multitude of things that that
glass is that the different molecular
positions that the liquid inside it
might take all the different ways that a
glass could make itself manifest all
that has to be subsumed into a Unity
that is the glass yes now there's a I
think it's n but it might be Mona I
don't remember um French impressionist
who went out and painted hay stacks a
whole series of them under different
series different conditions of
Illumination right and the hay stack is
the same but of course it's not because
the the colors that constitute the hay
stack shift dramatically and that's what
he was investigating it's so interesting
because two paintings of the same hay
stack really at the micro level bear
nothing in common right there's in
common they're separate in time they're
separate in place the constituent
elements are completely different but
there's an emergent reality which is the
Hast stack that uni unifies all those
variants in form yes and makes the
perception possible now the postmodern
claim is that there's no overarching
meta narrative it's like if there's no
overarching meta narrative you can't
even you can never perceive a Unity
right and they might say well there's a
limit to the manifestation of that Unity
right there's no ultimate unity it's
like oh yeah fine draw the line tell me
tell me exactly where the unity stops
and then it's worse than that because
let's assume that they're right that
there is no uniting meta narrative so no
single proper way of looking at the
world right you can understand that
something might be said about that well
then it does that mean that the Ultimate
Reality is disunified that there are
various forms of fundamental truth and
if reality itself can't be unified
because it's not unified in its Essence
then are we destined to conflict between
our own motivations even and how do you
and I agree on anything if it if it
doesn't Point towards a Unity that's
actually apprehensible and in some way
implicit in the world this is why this
is a huge huge problem this is why I was
so struck by what you were saying about
Fuko and and darod I think we can kind
of put Lan in here too because it
mirrors something that happened to me at
the end of writing this book I you
always come to a few surprises if you're
onto something in good book and to me
the biggest surprise was that I
understood the postmodernists in a
completely new way and I understood them
actually as part of a tradition that
probably goes back to heraclitus
speaking ofs right but yes but also runs
through people like David Hume and even
Bishop Barkley who are react ing to this
objectivist idea yeah hume's problem is
you cannot compute a pathway forward
merely by understanding the terrain
right you can't get an ought from an is
and the whole the whole thing is is
inference essentially and he's saying
that the only thing that we have in
front of us is the fact that the sun has
always risen in our experience and all
recorded Human Experience and it's only
on that that we're able to base the idea
that the sun's going to rise tomorrow
shatters this idea of something that
remains consistent from from day to day
and that's his scandal of induction yes
right that's the problem the chicken has
with the farmer right exactly the farmer
is the chicken's best friend every day
the farmer brings food until it's
Thanksgiving uhuh in which case the
faith the chicken has in the structure
of the world as a consequence of
induction turns out to be painfully
wrong yeah and the problem is we never
know and Hume was pointing this to some
degree we never know when the rug is
going to be pulled out from underneath
us yes or at what level yes you know you
could even take the sun itself I've
thought because you think well there's
nothing more consistent Than The Sun
It's like well until it emits a solar
flare that takes out our entire
electrical system which is a high
probability event right right in fact
there was a solar flare I think two days
ago that's on its way to Earth and no
one knows what the conse qu of that
storm will
be yeah yeah well so it seems to me that
in reality itself there are something
like levels of predictability that that
have something to do with statistical
regularity you know the sun is a fairly
predictable entity because of its
immense mass and because of its immense
mass and size the Transformations that
it un undergoes can be predicted to some
degree at a statistical level reliably
but not entirely and I guess that's also
partly that turns us back to the reason
that we evolv Consciousness at all yes
if we could rely on induction there'd be
no reason for Consciousness
Consciousness seems to be the mechanism
that corrects for the fact that the
world is not fundamentally predictable
like seriously not fundamentally
predictable irrevocably now how do you
understand if at all and this is where
we start to wander onto the dangerous qu
territory one of the things that's
really struck me and it's maybe only an
analogy is that the field the too vaboh
or the TA that the spirit of God that
rests on the water yes the that field
that that that Spirit interacts with
seems to be something like the pool of
infinite possibility like it's
represented for example in the
Mesopotamian stories AB yes exactly as a
dragon right and dragon is an
interesting representation because a
dragon is something fearsome and
predatory but also something that
contains the possibility of treasure yes
and so the underlying metaphor there is
that what our Consciousness confronts is
something infinite in danger and
possibility right right which is seems
perfectly reasonable and that the proper
stance to adopt to that is one of
something like a heroic Endeavor towards
fundamental truth it's and that that's
the best way of contending with that and
you you see Echoes of that in Genesis
because God is
also periodically characterized as the
victor of the battle over Leviathan for
example which looks like an analog of
Tiamat and so that's part of that heroic
heroic interaction with reality that
characterizes well the logos the spirit
of the logos itself right the seething
ocean of okay so at the quantum level so
what what's being discovered right well
so this like to approach this through
the debates that Neils bore used to have
with Albert Einstein so when quantum
mechanics was first making itself known
first and foremost to these very men
among others bore and Einstein were two
of the great architects of quantum along
with Lou de BR and and any number of I
mean Max plank we've already mentioned
but it's between Einstein and bour that
this fundamental irreducible tension
emerges in which bore sort of a Conan
philosopher
says we're banging up here against the
inherently unknowable to the human mind
right right right yeah these waves in
that describe probabilities this is
throd here sort of and Heisenberg also
kind of managed to mathematically
describe probability waves which tell
you where a particle is likely to be but
never where it actually is not because
we don't know but because in some
fundamental sense it isn't in any of
those positions and this is Bor idea
right it's possibility it is it is
possibility and and Heisenberg at one
point wonderfully Compares it to
Aristotelian potentia this ancient oh
yes really oh yes he has potential yes
oh that's so important to Pure right and
and so brings back this old Aristotelian
idea that the world is made of potential
and Anda and the realization of of
potential and so this is the the
Copenhagen interpretation which
basically says there are no holding
places in your mind for that which is
fundamentally UNP perceived so bore is
saying of course all of our measurements
and observations are always going to be
expressed in terms of classical
mechanics because they're going to be
making contact with our minds which are
shaped like classical mechanics in some
way these these categories like space
and time location and and position these
are baked into our minds this is where
you get the cont of it all and Einstein
wonderfully says if this is true then
it's the end of physics because to him
physics means deterministic yes and well
and it also means that
mathematics describes directly a reality
that is independent of us entirely and
that the world can be blanketed over
completely with these objective
mathematical terms that describe
whatever is most fundamentally real and
this dispute and its various tributaries
are are still going on today which is
one reason why this is such treacherous
territory to venture into because
there's always going to be an
alternative possible interpretation but
if you accept something like B's
interpretation which I believe Remains
the most philosophically coherent way of
dealing with these discoveries then what
you have is a situation very much like
what you're describing in Genesis now
that doesn't mean that the author of
Genesis was told by God about the
Schrodinger equations that's sort of
that would be the sort of pseudoscience
version of it but it does mean that the
pattern you're observing shot through
Genesis and as you indicate through the
whole Hebrew Bible of God's mind as the
resolver of of a fundamentally
unresolved possib the Caster into order
or that's good or very good yes and the
idea of us as essentially that the image
of God in us is essentially yeah okay
well so so
the radical left stance on abortion has
reached alarming levels from supporting
free abortions to even advocating for
infanticide we're witnessing an
unprecedented assault on the sanctity of
life this isn't just politics anymore
it's a moral crisis but there's hope
pre-born the nation's largest pro-life
organization is fighting back they're
strategically positioned in high
abortion areas offering a Lifeline to
women and their unborn children when you
join forces with pre-born you're
protecting the greatest victims in our
society babies in their mother's womb
over 300,000 babies have been saved
through pre-born efforts when a woman
considers ending her pregnancy pre-born
is there with compassion support and the
power of ultrasound technology this
simple tool doubles a baby's chance at
life you can be a part of this crucial
mission for just $28 you can fund one
ultrasound $140 saves five precious
lives for those able to make a larger
impact your tax deductible donation of
$5,000 will sponsor pre-born entire
network for 24 hours helping rescue 200
babies to make a difference dial pound
250 and say baby that's pound 250
keyword baby or donate securely at
pre-born docomo that's pre-born
docomo stand with truth stand for Life
dial pound 250 and say baby or visit
pre-born docomo
[Music]
today let me extend that supposition for
a minute so there's a field of
possibility that lay in lays in front of
you and it in a way it's surrounds and
constitutes all the objects so for
example this is a candle but not if I
throw it at you okay right right so
there's a nonzero possibility that one
of the less probable manifestations of
this object will occur yes okay so then
you might say well under what conditions
does this remain a candle okay okay well
that's very complicated yes because if I
smash it let's say on the edge here now
it's a knife right and it's just as much
a potential knife as it is a continuing
candle just as much not quite not quite
just as much hardly because we have
established an ethical framework between
us yes that's a set of our aims yes that
Define the manner in which we're going
to leave the possibilities of that
object as they predictably and non-
terrifyingly are but that's entirely
dependent on our it's so interesting
because it's dependent yes on our
ethical
aim you can imagine a situation where
you're in a bar where a beer bottle now
becomes a spear or a club yes and so
that's within that realm of possibility
now the reason that possibility doesn't
or does manifest itself is very much
dependent while partly on the intr iic
possibility of the object right but it
also depends on the aim of the of the
perceivers if if if we if our
conversation starts to deteriorate Into
the
Depths and we hit a fundamental place of
disagreement Y and we regard each other
as enemies in consequence then we're
likely to make some of the unpleasant
possibilities that surround us much more
likely to be manifest and one of the
things that indicates is that the manner
in which the factual itself reveals
itself is inextricably dependent on AIM
now what the biblical texts insist upon
in their uh what their injunction that
we should walk with God is that if we
oriented oursel towards the highest
possible aim and we did that
consistently and without Pride then the
manner in which the world would unfold
would be the manner that is good or very
good and that only when we deviate from
that Heavenly orientation right is it
the case that the possibilities of the
world that tilt it towards a more fallen
or hellish State manifest themselves so
I've been thinking about this with
regards to work so you know when Adam
and
Eve succumb to the sin of Pride they
they want to usurp the highest place
right under the Temptation Of The
Serpent yeah they fall and God says well
you're destined to toil and the world is
going to bring forth obstacles Pricks
Thorns thistles to you yes well so I've
been thinking about that a lot it's
like if your effort is
toilsome and if the world you inhabit is
Fallen how much of that is a consequence
of your pride and your misaligned aim
and your refusal to walk walk with God
see when Adam when God calls to Adam in
the garden after Adam and Eve fall yes
Adam hides from God so he's alienated
from the Divine Unity at that point
right and he re he refuses to habitually
walk with God as he had so his aim is
now seriously off right tempted as he
was by even the serpent that's when
burdensome toil enters the world and so
one of the things I've really been
thinking about is this is something job
wrestles with too is that the degree to
which the possibilities of the world
make themselves manifest as unjust
suffering are in precise proportion to
the misalignment of your aim and you see
that elaborated in the story of Cain and
abble for example like kan's aim is
misaligned nothing works for him right
can't get the right sacrifice he can't
get here's something that I've been
going through that initially will sound
like a real crash down from the y
Heights of our conversation but actually
I think embodies it almost
exactly it's it's suddenly occurred to
me that if instead of coming to my work
with aspirations to some external reward
such as fame or money or any of these
other things which are good things that
we would want I think for our friends
and all that but if you leave all of
that at the door and you just try try to
love things for the right reasons that
is you try to love the good and invest
yourself and your joy in the good of the
task before you everything trans the
whole world trans transforms yeah well
you know that's that's actually we can
refer back to the neurophysiology that's
actually literally true so the way your
perceptions work is that you establish
an
name and then the world appears to you
as a pathway toward that aim okay and
it's so it's so subtle so for example if
I want to walk if I decide that I want
to walk across a room yes the fact that
you're in the way now makes you tagged
by my emotional systems as negative the
fact that I've established the aim of
walking behind you makes you an obstacle
and the response to that is negative
emotion so so it's so interesting so you
establish an aim right A pathway opens
up okay now that pathway is De Marc By
obstacles and things that facilitate
your movement forward all the things
that facilitate your movement forward
are now positive to you they invite they
fill you with enthusiasm and everything
that's an obstacle is tag tagged with
negative emotion so you can see obstacle
facilitator Foe and friend right okay so
so what what it means is that the not
only do the phenomena of the world World
make themselves manifest to you as
perceptions yes in relation to your aim
yes so do your emotions yeah yeah so
then you think so that starts to b a
question if you're
suffering how much of that suffering is
a consequence of misaligned aim it's a
it's a seriously open question now you
talked about work you know yes well how
much of your experience of the suffering
because I I mean I I think that you will
still experience what we would
categorize as negative emotions or at
least that's been my my own experience
is that in this state of attention
toward the good for its own sake it's
not that all of the experiences we
describe as toil anxiety disappointment
not that those don't come it's that
precisely as you are suggesting your
interpretative framework for them has
radically altered the way that they land
with well it's it's it's even more
subtle than that I say
well take this situation of a football
player yeah who's
injured well in the important final game
yeah okay well we have documentation of
this occurs all the time people will
play with broken ankles they'll play
with broken thumbs and do they feel the
pain it's like it's very complicated
because the the emotions are being
experienced at multiple levels of
analysis simultaneously so at one level
because the digit or the ankle is
damaged there's interference there's
obstacle with regards to its local
movement and that's going to manifest
itself as pain but the overarching
pattern of activity which is to continue
with the game yeah is directed towards a
higher order and important goal yeah
okay that produces positive emotion
that's incentive reward the
same physiological response that cocaine
produces okay cocaine is powerfully
analgesic so at one of analysis you've
still got the pain but at another level
the fact that the activity that's
causing pain is linked to a distal
valuable goal yes produces a
pharmacological counterposition to the
pain and so so what you have then I
think that's what we experience when we
say something like that was difficult
yes painful let's say anxiety provoking
sure but it was certainly worth it so
it's like proximately yes pain distally
no it was a pre this is kind of what job
decides in the Book of Job job makes the
case
that he will not allow his proximal
suffering to demolish his essential
faith in himself or his essential faith
in the goodness of the spirit that
underlies reality and it's a it's a call
to courage what the story of Job
indicates I believe at least in part is
that no matter what happens to you in
your life no matter how deep the
suffering is your best St is one of one
that helps you maintain your faith your
optimism in the essential goodness of
yourself as a human being and job is
portrayed as a good man in the text your
essential faith in humanity itself and
your distal faith in the ultimate
benevolence of reality now it seems to
me also that without that we wouldn't be
able to move forward in difficult times
right they would just stop us yes so so
there's and it's also the case that if
you lose that Faith so let's say you're
suffering and even unjustly as as
occurred with job so you're being
tortured and you don't know why and it's
hurting your faith let's say you do lose
faith in yourself and you lose faith in
God you do what job's wife tells him to
do which is to CSE God and die right
right right it seems to me
indisputable that all that does is open
up a new hell under the one that you're
already suffering and it would be
because you're already in pain and
things are going badly for you and now
you demolish your faith in that distal
gal yes well then all of that
pharmacological remediation that would
go along with your sense that this is
hard but worth it that vanishes and
there's nothing left but the theater of
pain I mean that condition that you
described that underneath you is a new
hell deeper than the one you're in
that's exactly the condition of Satan in
Milton's right that exactly which fly as
hell am hell and under that another hell
opens up right and in fact that's his
pride his pride and desire to usurp
produces that right unwillingness to
change in the face of that's to to bring
a mind unchanged by time and place right
and that is one of the things that
Milton shares actually with Marlo Dr fa
that mephistophiles says do you think
think thinks thou that I who saw the
face of God can go anywhere now without
paint that having turned away from that
distal goal you're
describing everything even things that
we would account Pleasures becomes sort
of more that's what happens to Cain I
think is that Cain in killing Abel in
consequence of resentment right which is
not the only way to respond to the
failure of Cain's life right he chooses
that God accuses him of choosing that
that he invites sin in to have its way
with him yeah Cain decides to kill his
ideal right cuz Cain is bitter because
he's not able yes and so then he kills
Abel and then he says to God my
suffering is more than I can bear it's
like well obviously it's more than you
can bear because now you've demolished
the very thing upon which your
Redemption your salvation Your
Enthusiasm your shielding from Pain
depends right and he also is destined to
become a Wanderer right so interesting
he's destined to become a Wanderer of
Vagabond and in the Land of Nod it's so
cool so he's a Wanderer for the sake
same reason that psychopaths are
itinerant is that once you violate the
implicit moral order you have to seek
out new victims because your reputation
precedes you and no one will play with
you so you have to be a Wanderer that's
the classic literary Trope of the
itinerant bad guy he has to move from
place to place okay and then it's he's a
Wanderer in the Land of Nod which Robert
Lewis Stevenson associated with sleep
and unconsciousness it's like well of
course because the way that people react
to the evidence of their own criminality
is to degenerate into unconsciousness
they allow themselves to become
willfully blind so he's he's an un he's
a psychopathic Wanderer in the land of
unconsciousness with nothing but pain as
His companion that's very reminiscent of
the figure of Satan in in the miltonic
story and yes you see that in Dante too
the that the image of the Inferno
there's a hell yes but underneath that
there's another hell and then underneath
that there's another hell and then in
Dante you do get to the bottom of things
it's betrayal which I think is quite
brilliant right that's the that's what
Dante identified as the Cardinal
malevolence of Satan it's brilliant
because betrayal inverts trust right and
civilization depends on trust right like
love depends on trust family depends on
trust trust your relationship with
yourself depends on trust and so people
often become traumatized by a profound
betrayal of trust and so Dante got that
right but the idea that there are these
descending levels of suffering with
something ultimately malevolent at the
bottom that is a vision of hell it's and
it's I think it's right you know in my
clinical practice now and then I would
encounter people who had the deepest of
existential problems like there were
murderous impulses of foot in their
household for multiple Generations
brutal situations and in those
situations completely contaminated by
thousands of Lies thousands of Lies we'd
get to the bottom of something terrible
as that was and then something new would
open up that showed that where we had
got was nowhere near the bottom yet like
an infinite landscape of faithless pain
terrible wow terrible terrible thing to
see and the I mean unimaginable it's you
see this when in relationships like yeah
people often won't communicate with
their wife or husband because they don't
want to start an argument and what
happens is there's a surface
disagreement yes right and that produces
a certain amount of emotional tension
right and then maybe you start to talk
about it and you find that under that
there's a slightly more profound
disagreement right and you investigate
that and underneath that there's a
slightly more profound disagreement and
people stop the inquiry when they hit
the the point of depth that they can no
longer tolerate right so here's a way of
thinking about it so imagine that your
wife has had a history of a certain
amount of abuse at the hands of men
that's a very common situation and even
more
common becoming even more common all the
time yeah I I believe that you don't
know how much of whatever proximal
disagreement you have is a consequence
of some fundamental betrayal in her
history or even I would say the history
of her mother her aunts CU people talk
you know and these spirits of
betrayal lurk and haunt yes across
generations and it's terrible to to go
down into the substructure of a specific
disagreement because to solve it you
have to take a journey down to the
depths and you often discover a profound
betrayal you know you know how when you
hash something out with someone you're
close to yeah some time during that
process it's very likely if the
conversation is sincere and deep that
someone will break into tears right they
right yeah exactly that's a disolution
of their perceptions right and a
potential restructuring I think that's
what tears signify anyways that is a
descent into the abyss and Dante has so
much to say here too with what he does
with what we would call gravity and the
direction of gravity so what happens
when you get down to the bottom of the
Inferno past Judas in the mouth of Satan
is that the world flips upside down and
we move from Inferno to purgatorio so
they go past the the the pit of Hell and
begin to climb upwards toward Paradise
but there's two stages to that right
there's the stage where the weight the
gravity of the situation you're
describing that betrayal that has
basically ripped the ground out from
underneath you that's still pulling you
downward and so everything is Toil and
exertion it's kind of our condition that
you work your way you know there's a
reason I think that you call what you do
doing the work or work you know when you
sit with people and and kind of hash
these things out that by the time you
get down to the bottom of it you're sort
of then your journey can begin right
then you start to climb your way out yes
and once yeah well that's a symbolic
death and rebirth too right right and
and then beautifully magnificently once
you reach the Pinnacle of purgatory then
we move to the Third of of this sort of
triptic that Dante is giving us and
that's Paradise where beatric descends
to to lift Dante up and they start to
move of their own accord at light speed
up toward the heavens toward the planets
and she says to him wonderfully this is
what it looks like to your human
perception but really this is an
allegory of what's going on with us with
us spiritually she says this is the
force the same force that carries fire
up toward the stars is now carrying us
up toward God because there's one love
the last line of the poem the love that
moves the Sun and other stars there's
one motive force in the universe right a
mon so that's the monotheistic claim
United with that the notion that the
fundamental Unity is something positive
and benevolent yes right which is see I
also think I and I talked to Dawkins
Richard Dawkins about this recently so
tell me what you think about this
because when we think about wildly
successful businesses we often focus on
their great products cool branding and
Brilliant marketing but there's an
unsung hero in their success stories the
business behind the business that makes
selling simple for millions of
entrepreneurs that business is Shopify
Shopify is home to the number one
checkout on the planet and here's the
not so secret secret with shop pay they
boost conversions up to 50% that means
fewer abandoned carts and more completed
sales our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions in
today's market growth-minded businesses
need a Commerce Solution that's just as
flexible and dynamic as they are whether
your customers are browsing your website
scrolling through social media or
wandering into your store Shopify
ensures you're ready to sell ready to
elevate your business upgrade your
business today and get the same checkout
daily wire uses sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com sjbp
all lowercase go to shopify.com jbp
today to upgrade your selling that's
shopify.com
jbp one of the things I hashed out with
Dawkins to some degree was the fact that
in my estimation and I think in his the
metaphysic that made science itself
possible has been demolished so okay so
then I was thinking now he tends to lose
in he knows that but he tends to lose
interest in what that metaphysical
demolition constitutes so one of the
things I've been trying to lay out is
what is the metaphysics what's the
narrative frame of science itself now
Yung tried to figure this out right
that's why Yung was so interested in
alchemy so okay so yung's idea was that
there was
an an unconscious fantasy emerged in
counterposition to the spiritualization
of Christianity that highlighted a
lurking possibility that still exist in
the material world that hadn't been
explored and so that would be something
like the call of the of the
transmutation that there's there's a
substance a material substance that
could give us make us healthy right that
could grant us immortality and that
would transmute everything base into
what was highest led into gold okay so
there's a potential in the material
world that has that as
its promise that's the treasure Prime
right which is Prim Materia which is
exactly the thing with no qualities it's
thing with stripped bear of everything
so proposition was that there had to be
a fantasy very widely distributed that
there was something of immense value
still lurking in the material world
before the Scientific Enterprise could
get started yeah you need a motivation
for spending your whole life analyzing
the mating habits of fruit flies because
it isn't something that has obvious
imediate motivational or emotional
significance it has to be linked to
something else okay so what's it linked
to well here tell me what you think
about this and this is also why I think
that science which is another problem
Yung was trying to solve why did science
emerge in Europe yes and once right
right what were the preconditions okay
so so let's lay this out tell tell me
what you
think the cosmos has a logos so it has
an order yes okay fair enough the order
is intelligible to the mind of man
okay the order is good such that
understanding it better makes things
better not worse contrary let's say to
the story of Frankenstein right right
you're not going to uncover man-made
Horrors beyond your compr or that's
right or you build a techn technological
Enterprise like Prometheus that Dooms
you that can happen right okay the idea
would be that wouldn't happen if your
aim was true okay and then the final
piece of the puzzle is that through the
dedic through dedicated submission to
that logos you can explore in a manner
that reveals it and that will be
Redemptive to you as a scientist but
also broadly beneficial okay those look
to me like the metaphysical necessary
metaphysical foundations of science
because and none of them those are
starting points they're game rules like
you can't get to those within the
scientific Enterprise they have to be
laid down now I think they were laid
down fundamentally in the
judeo-christian system right is that
there is a logos to the world mhm that
logos is apprehensible to man that it's
fundamentally good that you can approach
it in the proper spirit and if you do
that'll be Redemptive yes this is why
although I don't think Dawkins knows and
I tried to push him on this I think this
is why he found himself compelled to
State relatively recently that he was a
cultural
Christian and I pushed him on that I
said okay well that implies that the
Christians got something right what like
we got nowhere with that we got with
that so I don't know if you're familiar
with the three body problem the the not
the Chinese science fiction novel made a
big splash as a Netflix series recently
but it's the novels that really grapple
with what you are talking about and
what's so remarkable about this series
to me is that unlike a lot of American
Science Fiction youve get Star Trek Star
Wars which kind of give you this Misty
secular pseudo science where it's the
med orans that hold things together or
it's our humanist values in Star Trek in
these this Trilogy of novels remembrance
of Earth's past the first book is named
after famously an
unresolvable problem in in astrophysics
a Newtonian mechanics if you have three
bodies mutually attracting each other
it's impossible to lay out a logos
exactly what you're describing that is a
consistent system that can be reduced to
abstract principles comprehended by the
human mind and then used to fly outer
space to navigate through whatever
situation you find yourself in and the
reason that shishin Leo named began with
this is because he is genuinely peering
into the abyss of what science looks
like once you pull the rug of those five
principles out from underneath us that
there you might hit a point at which
actually the whole structure of reality
simply scrambles your monkey brain it
just doesn't compute inside of us
because we no longer have this
conviction that the imprint on our brain
is the is effectively the hand of God
and so that's the same imprint that RIT
large is is pressed across the whole
universe when Newton came up with his
laws there was a widespread belief
derived from Aristotle that there were
two sets of rules for the physical world
it was called the super lunary and the
sublunary spheres and that they was
named that because the barrier was
supposed to be at the Moon where the
moon's orbit is there starts to obtain a
whole new set of of laws and the reason
people thought this is quite reasonable
is that you look at the stars and
they're following these very regular
patterns that we can chart and know more
and more through observations you look
at things around here they don't move
like that kind of clockwork surely you
get Stones falling to the Earth you get
fire moving up into the air and so
people thought they're just a different
so Christians would say Fallen order
down here and there is a
pristine Reason Music of the Spheres yes
operating even perhaps the angels are
pushing them around whatever and what as
opposed to forces as opposed to exactly
yes this is a big in my in my book I
call them ghosts in Exile the forces
because right and and this idea is what
when when Newton comes out with the
prinkipia for the first time we now
think oh he discovered gravity yes of
course he outlines the way of of
calculating the force of gravity between
two masses but at a much much deeper
level what he does is he shatters the
barrier between the sublunar and the
super lunar spheres because now showing
underlying Unity right here's the three
rules that will govern not only the Arc
of a comet across the sky but the
Descent of an apple from a tree why did
Newton have any right to expect that he
could do that why were people working on
that problem at that time it's because
of the assumptions that you're
describing that the world is not only
organized according to AOS which is sort
of the Pagan claim that we talked about
in gree but also that that logos is
answerable to the patterns that are in
our minds however they came about you
talk about Evolution you talk about
whatever but we now have and this is
what we experience them as it's
dishonest I think to describe our
experience of these principles as
anything else when when we see math we
think we're looking at something
universally valid and that something
that not only hangs together in our
brains but will also send a rocket ship
to Mars one day and that's because of
this Faith the and that is something
like that is something like a transposed
monotheistic Faith it's the notion that
yes at the foundation or at the Pinnacle
there is an ultimate unity in which
resides all things in the absence of
contradiction yes so now we're up
against we wouldn't recognize it this
way but we're up against another Super
lunary sublunary barrier and that is the
puzzle of how to reconcile relativity
with with quantum mechanics and I know
that you've talked to scientists about
this on on your podcast and I would I
would say of course that like I am not
going to be the person that resolves
this puzzle but from the outside as a
scholar of the history of Science and
also a classicist I can see that this is
the exact same issue this is two Realms
that answer to two different and
contradictory set of apparently
contradictory set of laws and scientists
are currently hammering away some of
them working in string theory others in
other versions of you know quantum
gravity and so forth are hammering away
at that barrier right under the
presumption that the fact bre through
yes exactly that the fact that they
can't detect the unity is actually a
consequence of their ignorance not of
the fact that reality itself is
disjointed that there's a Fab there's a
seam in the fabric that we will never
bring back together or alternatively
that there's a seam in our minds that we
can never reconcile that there's
something you need both of these
convictions and I think that anybody
that does science is still operating on
these convictions even if outwardly they
would they would deny it well if the
hypothesis of Yung is true in the broad
sense and that you see it implies
something very interesting that I also
saw as a practicing practicing scientist
so I was involved and still am in a lot
of research Enterprises right the
production of approximately the
equivalent of 30 phds it's something
like that and I watched scientists who
were genuine scientists and scientists
who were careerists and huers and I
watched how they operate and it's so
interesting because the scientists that
actually discover something of value and
I would say the ones that have the
deepest careers and the best relations
with their students the ones that are on
the right path
yeah they're suffused by uh religious
ethos and and it it's very deep so I
spent a lot of time I wouldn't say
mastering statistics because I'm no
statistical genius but understanding how
to conduct a statistical analysis yeah
well enough so that I could do it and
actually do it and actually understand
it yeah and one of the things that I
realized was like if you have a
spreadsheet that's full of data 100,000
data points let's say there is an
indefinite number of ways that you can
apprehend
that Matrix that you can see it right
there's all the possible combinations of
the numbers in the in the Matrix right
okay so then out of that you can draw a
discovery let's say that's revealed in
the patterns but you cannot do that if
your orientation to the spreadsheet is
the progression of your
career the pathways that make themselves
manifest in the numbers will be those
that further your career so this is part
of the problem of replicability
socking exactly you can do an infinite
number of correlational analysis and if
you do a 100 of them five of them will
be statistically significant well you
can just ignore the fact that
95% of them weren't and report on those
5% and the thing is there's a profound
PLL to do that because in any given
experiment you might have two any given
experiment you might have devoted two
years of your life for a graduate
student the success of the analysis
might determine whether or not they get
their PHD like there's a lot at stake
and so then you might say well why not
just discover within the Matrix of
numbers the pathway that furthers your
career yeah and the answer to that is
well that's a complicated problem it's
like is there anything other than
self-promotion well you I told my
students if you allow your careerist
interests to determine the decisions you
make when you're conducting your
statistics which will be well hidden
uhhuh from everyone else but also from
yourself one of the negative
consequences is that well you betray the
spirit of Science and so you pull the
rug out from underneath yourself but you
also convince yourself of the existence
of a delusion that you might then cha
Chase for the rest of your life right
one so yeah yeah yeah so it's so
interesting and this is something that
scientists don't really concentrate on
it's like how how do you inculcate in
the scientific investigator the ethos
that produces the desire to search for
truth and not Career Success let's say
at every micro level of the scientific
Endeavor and I think that once the
scientific Endeavor becomes sufficiently
dissociated from its underlying Jud
judeo-christian narrative yeah there is
no protection against that and I also
think that's why the scientific
Enterprise is corrupting so rapidly well
what is the greatest example of the
phenomenon you're describing that's
recently been in the public eye I would
argue it's katangi brown Jackson in the
Supreme Court saying citing a study that
black babies have better health outcomes
when they're in danger if they go to
Black doctors and she cites this in
defense of all sorts of things like
affirmative action and and race
conscious preferences in hiring and so
forth now I I doubt I rather doubt that
katangi brown Jackson realizes this but
that's a junk study and it's a junk
study for exactly the reason that you're
describing which is that there's a
hidden variable and the hidden variable
is birth infinite number of hidden
variables exactly but the the one that
really counts here is is birth weight so
when babies have a low or dangerous
birth weight they are more likely to be
taken to White doctors whatever the
reason for that is and so in that case
they'll have worse outcomes because
you're dealing more the Specialists are
white yes theth that's why well that's
so much of medical science and social
science is corrupted by the fact of uh
specious correlations yes and this the
authors of the study were aware of this
variable and as were the the reviewers
and and discounted it purposefully so
it's an instance of exactly the sort of
thing that you are describing of
filtering out that data and yes in that
context of course science real science
the handmaiden of knowledge one of the
most ancient and beautiful human
practices is going to become the science
capital T capital S and endorse kamla
Harris in scientific America because
then then you're you've got to serve
something right you've got to attach
this Enterprise to some sort of sort of
purpose so then you you might ask as a
as a mentor to scientists well I'm
telling you to do something difficult
I'm saying that
if the data reveals for example that
your study is flawed yeah fatally yeah
you're going to have to accept that if
the study indicates that the hypothesis
upon which upon whose promotion you've
St your reputation is wrong yeah you're
going to have to admit that and you're
going to have to suffer the consequences
of both of those maybe you won't get
your PhD maybe you'll have to do another
series of studies maybe your career
won't advance property maybe you'll be
humiliated as a consequence of your
previous claims yeah okay so then you
might say well if that's the
cost then well why not just falsify this
is the temptation of the lie constantly
why not just falsify and I would say on
the positive
side the negative side is well that's
wrong and maybe you'll get caught and
that'll be a catastrophe and the abyss
is there and all of that but you could
say well I don't care like like rol
nikov says in crime and punishment I'm
not going to get caught
so we're not worried about that and if I
can lie to further my career then so be
it okay so then you might say well why
why not do that because I think the
question isn't isn't ever why lie the
question always is why not lie and in
the scientific realm what you sacrifice
if you deceive yourself and others in
the service of your career is
the discovery of the concordance between
your soul and the logos of the world
because there isn't anything more
enthusiasm provoking than actually
discovering something new and it's
because you get a sense of the Eternal
Harmony between things you think oh that
realization which is a new form of Truth
is of so much value that the price I
paid for that sacrific my old
presumptions that my career has taken a
strange path as I pursue the truth
that's irrelevant in comparison to the
profundity of I think it's the
establishment of that Harmony between
soul and Cosmos it's something like that
it's raw Joy I mean that's the treasure
in the field the man sell that's the
pearl of great price that's exactly
right and one of the most striking
things you said to me in Athens was you
told the story of realizing that most of
what you said early on in your career
you didn't believe or you didn't have
the reason to believe or there was there
was some element of dishonesty of Lies
yes and and you said I decided to tell
the truth and see where it would take me
and that whatever happens to you because
of the truth is going to be better than
anything else yeah even if you don't
know it that's that's I think that's
really the conclusion that job draws
it's that and it it's also the act of
faith that
Abraham performs when he makes his
multitude of sacrifices because God
comes to Abraham as the spirit of
Adventure right God comes to say to
Abraham you're content and satiated but
that's not enough yeah leave everything
leave everything behind that's right
well why well okay so now Abraham agrees
he's going to do this so he follows the
Divine path of Adventure now he has to
make sequential sacrifices as he moves
up because he has to dispense with
what's no longer appropriate as his
capacity expands he transforms so
radically that he gets a new name right
and he kind of encounters every
Adventure in the world as he grows and
that's also what makes him the father of
Nations so he starts it's so cool it's
such a great idea the idea is that the
forthright adherence to the Clarion call
of divine Adventure is the same pathway
that radically increases what the
evolutionary biologists would describe
as reproductive success right construed
over a very long period of time but but
it makes sense right imagine that you
have that your deepest Instinct pulls
you out into the world beyond your zone
of comfort and impels you to develop
right well obviously that's going to
make you more attractive to people of
the opposite sex but then also obviously
if you're a contender in that manner you
can wrestle with serpents you can handle
serpents without being bitten yeah and
you teach your children that well you
establish that ethos of of of Divine
patriarchy that's a good way of thinking
about it well why wouldn't your
descendants be numerous and and take
over the world so to speak that's the
promise of the Covenant in the in the
Old Testament oh yeah I mean this is all
the all these things shall be added unto
you right all the stuff that you just
talked about that you give up all your
career advancement all your Readiness to
throw yourself at the feet of the first
person that's going to give you a Nobel
Prize or whatever shiny thing you're
you're chasing after you got to get rid
of all of that in order to seek the
Kingdom of Heaven first in order to love
the good for its own sake that stripping
that you're describing in sacrifice is
kind of well in Christ extends that
because he says that also that extends
beyond your commitments to Career let's
say or even to to the benefits of life
more abundant and material Prosperity
said you also have to do that even in
relationship to your own family right is
that every single thing that's good yes
has to be sacrificed to the highest
possible exactly and then out of that
Source will arise all the other Goods
that's why Abraham gets Isaac back as
far as I'm concerned right because he's
willing to offer his son to the same
process that impelled him out of his
immature satiation yeah he offers his
son fully and the consequence of that is
he gets him back right yeah and I think
that's exactly right is that I do
believe that and I see that all the time
is that the more you try to conserve
your children and pull them to you and
shelter them from the adventure of their
life the more they're going to struggle
to get away with you from you and to
have nothing to do with you and if
instead you throw them out into the
world
then that paradoxically increases the
probability that you'll establish a
relationship with them that will be
sustainable through the entire course of
your existence yeah well I suspect that
there's a reason why it's Christ who
does this because this is I think also
what God does in endowing Adam and Eve
with the ability to choose to Rebel if
you think of God as knowing in advance
that he's bringing these creatures into
the world you know in in the Quran the
choice on God God's part to create man
is greeted with utter bewilderment by
the Angels they say why would you bring
into the world this creature that is
going to spread Bloodshed in the land
when you already have perfect Spiritual
Beings us the angels to worship you and
sing your Praises at at all times
and God in the Quran just says I I I
know what you do not know he basically
responds that it's that it's a mystery
but I suspect that the answer to this in
the Christian tradition is God desires
you around so much that he is willing to
let you go that he's willing to put you
in the garden as Milton says sufficient
to have stood but freed you fall and and
that this is the sort of primordial
fatherly act that you're describing in
your own life it's the essence of of
what we mean when we say father yes
right father the word father implies a
commonality of spirit across all
instantiations of fatherhood right so
then you might say well father as a
category implies an essence of of of an
an essential element of the patriarchy
could be power that's not a great way of
establishing relationship with your
children it could instead be something
like encouragement of of Courage right
right and and faith in the ability of
your children to contend with whatever
comes their way and not to Shield them
from it knowing that they will expand in
the most optimal manner if they face
their challenges forthrightly yes I
think the confusion of this with power
and of course it can be abused and
turned into a yes of course no question
but to say that because of that it
simply is fatherhood or patriarchy is
oppression that is the exertion of force
over another is yeah that's where the
postmodernist went way off the rails
Fuko in particular it's all power it's
like that's pretty godamn convenient for
you buddy you know and I see that
terrible alliance with Hedonism right if
your orientation is just to get what the
narrowest part of you wants now think
about sexual Hedonism in that regard and
that's particularly relevant to Fuko as
far as I'm concerned it's like
well why do want Power well so that
people will do what you compel them to
do okay well what do you want to compel
them to do well obviously if you have to
compel them to do something it's going
to be radically to your benefit and not
at all to theirs because that's the only
situation under which force would be
required like if I make you a good deal
I don't have to use power right so power
is the handmaiden of Hedonism
fundamentally and Hedonism is the
sacrifice of others to your short-term
whims yeah that's no principle on which
to found the world that doesn't even
work for chimpanzees by the way France
dewal showed this quite clearly if you
track the stability of chimp
patriarchies across time yeah the rulers
who exert Force die a bitter and
premature end because their underlings
Rebel and in a moment of weakness tear
the Tyrant to shreds it's like something
out of makel yeah definitely definitely
I think we discussed this in Athens this
is what Plato describes as the Tyrant
because what have you done the minute
you've forced somebody into doing your
will you've effectively made that person
into an appendage of your own soul
you've turned them into some part the
worst elements of your own soul
certainly certainly and so you live in a
world now that increasingly to the
extent that you have power over it
includes only you you are inherently the
most the most narrow part of you so this
is that that that's a very good
description of hell is that what you're
doing first is you're enlight allowing
yourself to be possessed by your most
immature and self-centered momentary
whims those are your God now you need to
use power because other people won't go
along with that just like kids in a
playground won't go along with the bossy
kid who only wants to play his game
right right so this is also so we found
that the dark so-called dark Triad
traits melanism narcissism psychopathy
they Clump together that that
conceptualization had to be expanded to
include sadism which is the positive
Delight in the unnecessary suffering of
others and I think the reason for that
is is that if you start to
instrumentalize other people and they go
along with it or are unable to withstand
your tyrannical Force you end up
absolutely contemptuous of them and not
least because their acquiescence to your
idiot hedonistic tyranny Makes You
Suffer terribly like they're not
standing up to you and setting you right
and so you start to just like this is
what happened to Hitler who ended his
life with full contempt for the German
people for not being the sort of people
who deserved his Stellar leadership
right right well while Berlin was
burning and Europe was in runes right I
mean that thing there's hell that's a
good image of Hell absolutely now the
thing that you said about Cain and Abel
that in order to escape his sense of
inferiority Abel destroys his IDE ideal
I mean I've often thought about what we
call wokeness it's a kind of global war
on archetypes right it's like this your
beauty standards make me feel bad yeah
absolutely so instead of addressing that
through my own personal change I'm going
to try to basically tear the whole
fabric of of spiritual reality or
absolute truth or something down out of
the sky yeah well in the AOS underneath
that is something like any axis of
comparison where lesser has to be
demolished yes now part of the reason
that's so self-devouring is well let's
say you're a young person who's not
particularly attractive yeah okay that's
a that's a trouble and the attractive
the beauty standard is an ideal and a
judge and a harsh one but then you think
well you're young like there's an
undeserved advantage and there's a
multitude of dimensions on which you're
unfairly healthy compared to many people
in the world you're going to
subvert the terrible standards of the
judge until none of those differences
remain right well I think that's why you
get in the Communist societies a
degeneration into well everyone's equal
yes with nothing well right that's where
you make people equal is when everyone
has nothing you know where this is
really beautifully depicted is in the
screw tape letters CS Lewis's sort of
letters from demons to one another he
basically makes of them a totalitarian
Society describes as a totalitarian
Society there's this wonderful moment
where you know Screw tape is writing to
Wormwood his I believe it's his nephew
so younger demon and he's coaching him
and at one point he says the thing that
most confounds us about the enemy that
is God is that he really does love the
little Vermin that is this is the thing
we cannot understand that's by
definition yes by definition right and
in his in his fatherly nature and in his
definition as God in the next letter he
says I I hope you haven't shown my
letters to anybody because of course if
I were taken to mean that there really
is such a thing as love that would be
heresy and I would be very much
condemned in in Hell love is impossible
we in Hell know that love is impossible
because everything expands by eating up
what is around it right right that's the
rapacious hordes of devastating mankind
motivated by nothing other than power
which was really as far as I'm concerned
a complete confession on the part of
Fuko it's like really there's nothing
but Power eh really that's what you
think that's what you think about
everyone and there's no actual dialogue
between people there's just the
competition between plays for power
that's your world you're definitely yeah
you might be successful Mr Fuko but that
just made you the biggest devil in hell
and that's a pretty weird definition of
success and it's there's something even
more pathological about that because if
there is no game but power so there's no
love let's say if there is no game but
Power I'm a Fool to do anything but play
a power game with you and I'm also a
fool not to win right at whatever cost
right right and
so that's I think the unconscious
motivation that underlies the claim that
the ruler of the Earthly realm is the
spirit of power it's like okay if that's
the case then clearly if I can I should
now I know as a clinician if you're the
kind of person who thinks I can
and therefore I should I should get the
hell away from you as rapidly as
possible because that is the core
proclamation of the possessed psychopath
it's like you are nothing but a field of
opportunities not only for me but for my
deepest darkest and most fragmented
desires yeah well that's that Legion of
devil Devils that constitutes hell and
the idea that this is the that this
force or Satan is the prince of the
world basically sets us up to understand
ourselves as either slipstreaming into
that logic operating according to our
most based desires you say dissolving
ourselves effectively into raw material
power or positing the existence of a
separate principle from the raw
mechanical workings of of the material
world well I I think the old the old and
New Testaments are investigations into
what that alternative to power is and I
think I think you can sum it up actually
it took a long time to figure out how to
sum it up well it's something like the
spirit of voluntary
self-sacrifice right because the the
biblical stories are an investigation
into what sacrifices best please God
right it's an it's a millennial long
investigation what is the right work
which is the same thing as the right
sacrificial pattern and there isn't
anything more diametrically opposed to
the claim of power than the proclamation
that the proper Community is founded on
the highest possible Spirit of voluntary
self-sacrifice and that is what's
emblematic about the crucifixion right
right so God himself sacrifices himself
as voluntarily yeah to Hoist the future
and the community onto his shoulders
it's like yes that's that's a complete
inversion of the notion of power
absolutely and I think I can't see how
you can possibly claim that the that the
healthy Community yeah can in fact be
founded on anything other than sacrifice
I mean to the degree that you love your
wife you give up everything that's only
local to you yeah for the relationship
that's sacrificial that's what you do
with your children that's what you do
with your friends that is the antithesis
of power yes yeah I think the
postmodernist realization unconscious
though it may be that Christianity is
directly opposed to the postmodernist
claim that power rules is the ultimate
driving force of the culture War that's
what it looks like to me absolutely and
what you're describing in one sense of
course it's the most functional thing in
the world because you it's the only way
to found a healthy community in the
other sense that we've been talking
about more it's extremely inexpedient to
propose that you should leave you should
shove all of these immediate desires
that you have and Trust right believe
that you're going on the other side of
that to receive blessing right
definitely well I don't I actually don't
think there's any difference between
that and cortical maturation okay well
because you know you start out in the
world as a plethora of competing
impulses right and those are integrated
Across Time by your development of the
ability to share all right to to engage
in reciprocal action and by your ability
to forego immediate gratification so
that you can stabilize the future and it
takes it's cortical maturation that
allows that to occur on the
physiological plan it's like these and
it isn't the Freudian repression of the
motivations And the emotions it's the
integration of the motivations and
emotions that's their subduing right
that Adam's called upon to do it's their
integration yeah that makes them a
higher order Unity that is in fact the
best way of even providing for those
motivational systems what they want in
the broadest range of places and across
the longest span of time does that
include that cortical
maturation the establishment of these
sort of perceptual categories that we've
been talking about that is the building
of the pathways that would enable us to
do things like look at this glass well
it is so imagine that as you mature as a
child if you're properly socialized so
you become an increasingly desirable
play partner which is like the
definition of proper
socialization all the categories that
you automatize so that become part of
your not only your character but your
physiology are categories that you build
as you pursue that aim right it become
what you this is true
neurophysiologically you bloody well
become what you practice right and you
practice in accordance with your aim
right so the aim that's the Jacob's
letter Story the aim should be to the in
able that Reigns above everything
Supreme right right so in a sense the
whole conversation kind of comes full
circle if you think about we've talked
about so many things and yet we're
really talking I think about one thing
and this is what I mean when I say that
the Book of Genesis at this very
profound level provides you with this
template that you can use to understand
and interpret any number of things you
talk about like you know is it about
quantum physics it's not about quantum
physics but is quantum physics
uncovering in the material sphere the
pattern that we also uncover in the
psychological sphere that we also well
that's what you'd expect if there's an
underlying Unity is that the most
ancient stories of mankind the orienting
stories from a multitude of different
cultures would dovetail with what we're
actually discovering about reality I
mean what's the coun counter hypothesis
right that so this is all just I mean
the counter apothesis is the postmodern
yeah right or or even the enlightenment
idea that that's all Superstition that
is now being supplanted by this
rationalist orientation all right well
that's good that's a good place to stop
I think what we'll do on the daily wies
side for those of you who are watching
and listening I think what I'll do is
I'll interrogate Spencer further about
his new book let's walk through it and I
would also like to find out as we walk
through the book why those topics
interested you you know why they gripped
you and compelled you and so let's we
can do an analysis of the book but also
a psychological analysis of the
motivations underneath it so let's do
that all right so thank you everyone for
watching and listening and thank you
it's very nice to see you again by the
way eny that was that was fun there's
something new being born you know it's
it's it's really something powerful to
see I can see it making itself manifest
everywhere and it is whatever is going
to we're either going to devolve into a
world that is in
fact um ruled by the spirit of power
like the Chinese Society for example
with the all SE eye of soron everywhere
or we're going to revaluate our wisdom
and pull out of it what we need to move
forward properly and you know you can
see that those two proerties battling at
the moment but I see more and more
reason to be optimistic so we can all
pray for that if we have any sense
because the alternative is pretty damn
Dreadful or even unimaginably Dreadful
yes but I See the Light breaking too
actually I think you know I know you've
been thinking a lot about the Tower of
Babel lately and
the Chinese system that you're
describing sounds a lot like the kinds
of neare Eastern societies that I think
the Tower of Babel story definely it's
the Eternal Babylon Eternal babyl and
and I I also feel despite the apparent
Darkness around us I look at for example
ion her Al Le I think about you know
Neil Ferguson yes who are sort of un un
Excavating yeah these Russell Brand for
that matter Russ BR I know well it's
every as you say it's in many different
locations kind of Revival and it's
something that a lot of people have been
praying for actually for a long time
something that has to happen organically
from the ground up I think something we
don't necessarily understand or we we
wish weren't true is that you can't
Hammer this down into people's minds you
have that's Moses sin yeah yeah
interesting too heavy use of the rod
yeah yeah all right sir well thank you
very much it was lovely talking to you
today much appreciated and and to all of
you watching and listening we appreciate
your time and your attention
bye-bye
[Music]